PAGE 1
Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
A well-conditioned estimator for
large-dimensional covariance matrices
Olivier Ledoita,b and Michael Wolf c,,1
aAnderson Graduate School of Management, UCLA, USA
bEquities Division, Credit Suisse First Boston, USA
cDepartment of Economics and Business, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Ramon Trias Fargas 25–27, 08005
Barcelona, Spain
Received 26 February 2001
Abstract
Many applied problems require a covariance matrix estimator that is not only invertible, but
also well-conditioned (that is, inverting it does not amplify estimation error). For large-
dimensional covariance matrices, the usual estimator—the sample covariance matrix—is
typically not well-conditioned and may not even be invertible. This paper introduces an
estimator that is both well-conditioned and more accurate than the sample covariance matrix
asymptotically. This estimator is distribution-free and has a simple explicit formula that is easy
to compute and interpret. It is the asymptotically optimal convex linear combination of the
sample covariance matrix with the identity matrix. Optimality is meant with respect to a
quadratic loss function, asymptotically as the number of observations and the number of
variables go to inﬁnity together. Extensive Monte Carlo conﬁrm that the asymptotic results
tend to hold well in ﬁnite sample.
r 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
AMS 2000 subject classiﬁcations: 62H12; 62C12; 62J07
Keywords: Condition number; Covariance matrix estimation; Empirical Bayes; General asymptotics;
Shrinkage
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Corresponding author. Fax: +34-93-542-1746.
E-mail address: michael.wolf@econ.upf.es (M. Wolf).
1Research supported by DGES Grant BEC2001-1270.
0047-259X/03/$ - see front matter r 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0047-259X(03)00096-4


PAGE 2
1. Introduction
Many applied problems require an estimate of a covariance matrix and/or of its
inverse, where the matrix dimension is large compared to the sample size. Examples
include selecting a mean–variance efﬁcient portfolio from a large universe of stocks
(see Markowitz [16]), running generalized least squares (GLS) regressions on large
cross-sections (see e.g., Kandel and Stambaugh [12]), and choosing an optimal
weighting matrix in the general method of moments (GMM; see Hansen [10]) where
the number of moment restrictions is large. In such situations, the usual estimator—
the sample covariance matrix—is known to perform poorly. When the matrix
dimension p is larger than the number n of observations available, the sample
covariance matrix is not even invertible. When the ratio p=n is less than one but not
negligible, the sample covariance matrix is invertible but numerically ill-conditioned,
which means that inverting it ampliﬁes estimation error dramatically. For large p; it
is difﬁcult to ﬁnd enough observations to make p=n negligible, and therefore it is
important to develop a well-conditioned estimator for large-dimensional covariance
matrices. If we want a well-conditioned estimator at any cost, we can always impose
some ad hoc structure on the covariance matrix to force it to be well-conditioned,
such as diagonality or a factor model. But, in the absence of prior information about
the true structure of the matrix, this ad hoc structure will be in general misspeciﬁed,
and the resulting estimator may be so biased that it bears little resemblance to the
true covariance matrix. To the best of our knowledge, no existing estimator is both
well-conditioned and more accurate than the sample covariance matrix. The
contribution of this paper is to propose an estimator that possesses both these
properties asymptotically. One way to get a well-conditioned structured estimator is
to impose the condition that all variances are the same and all covariances are zero.
The estimator we recommend is a weighted average of this structured estimator and
the sample covariance matrix. Our estimator inherits the good conditioning
properties of the structured estimator and, by choosing the weight optimally
according to a quadratic loss function, we ensure that our weighted average of the
sample covariance matrix and the structured estimator is more accurate than either
of them. The only difﬁculty is that the true optimal weight depends on the true
covariance matrix, which is unobservable. We solve this difﬁculty by ﬁnding a
consistent estimator of the optimal weight, and show that replacing the true optimal
weight with a consistent estimator makes no difference asymptotically. Standard
asymptotics assume that the number of variables p is ﬁnite and ﬁxed, while the
number of observations n goes to inﬁnity. Under standard asymptotics, the sample
covariance matrix is well-conditioned (in the limit), and has some appealing
optimality properties (e.g., it is the maximum likelihood estimator for normally
distributed data). However, this is a bad approximation of many real-world
situations where the number of variables p is of the same order of magnitude as the
number of observations n; and possibly larger. We use a different framework, called
general asymptotics, where we allow the number of variables p to go to inﬁnity too.
The only constraint is that the ratio p=n must remain bounded. We see standard
asymptotics as a special case where it is optimal to put (asymptotically) all the weight
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
366


PAGE 3
on the sample covariance matrix and none on the structured estimator. In the general
case, however, our estimator is asymptotically different from the sample covariance
matrix, substantially more accurate, and of course well-conditioned. Note that the
framework of general asymptotics is related to the one of Kolmogorov asymptotics,
where it is assumed that the ratio p=n tends to a positive, ﬁnite constant.
Kolmogorov asymptotics is used by, among others, Aivazyan et al. [1] and Girko [5–
7]. High-dimensional problems, where the number of variables p is large compared to
the sample size n; are also studied by La¨ uter [13] and La¨ uter et al. [14], but from the
point of view of testing and inference, not estimation like in the present paper.
Extensive Monte-Carlo simulations indicate that: (i) the new estimator is more
accurate than the sample covariance matrix, even for very small numbers of
observations and variables, and usually by a lot; (ii) it is essentially as accurate or
substantially more accurate than some estimators proposed in ﬁnite sample decision
theory, as soon as there are at least ten variables and observations; (iii) it is better-
conditioned than the true covariance matrix; and (iv) general asymptotics are a good
approximation of ﬁnite sample behavior when there are at least 20 observations and
variables. The paper is organized as follows. The next section characterizes in ﬁnite
sample the linear combination of the identity matrix and the sample covariance
matrix which minimizes quadratic risk. Section 3 develops a linear shrinkage
estimator with asymptotically uniformly minimum quadratic risk in its class (as the
number of observations and the number of variables go to inﬁnity together). In
Section 4, Monte-Carlo simulations indicate that this estimator behaves well in ﬁnite
samples, and Section 5 concludes. Appendix A contains the proofs of the technical
results of Section 3.
2. Analysis in ﬁnite sample
The easiest way to explain what we do is to ﬁrst analyze in detail the ﬁnite sample
case. Let X denote a p  n matrix of n independent and identically distributed (iid)
observations on a system of p random variables with mean zero and covariance
matrix S: Following the lead of Muirhead and Leung [19], we consider the Frobenius
norm: jjAjj ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
trðAAtÞ=p
p
: (Dividing by the dimension p is not standard, but it does
not matter in this section because p remains ﬁnite. The advantages of this convention
are that the norm of the identity matrix is simply one, and that it will be consistent
with Deﬁnition 1 below.) Our goal is to ﬁnd the linear combination S ¼ r1I þ r2S
of the identity matrix I and the sample covariance matrix S ¼ XX t=n whose
expected quadratic loss E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 is minimum. Haff [8] studied this class of linear
shrinkage estimators, but did not get any optimality results. The optimality result
that we obtain in ﬁnite sample will come at a price: S will not be a bona ﬁde
estimator, because it will require hindsight knowledge of four scalar functions of the
true (and unobservable) covariance matrix S: This would seem like a high price to
pay but, interestingly, it is not: In the next section, we are able to develop a bona ﬁde
estimator S with the same properties as S asymptotically as the number of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
367


PAGE 4
observations and the number of variables go to inﬁnity together. Furthermore,
extensive Monte-Carlo simulations will indicate that 20 observations and variables
are enough for the asymptotic approximations to typically hold well in ﬁnite sample.
Even the formulas for S and S will look the same and will have the same
interpretations. This is why we study the properties of S in ﬁnite sample ‘‘as if’’ it
was a bona ﬁde estimator.
2.1. Optimal linear shrinkage
The squared Frobenius norm jj  jj2 is a quadratic form whose associated inner
product is: /A1; A2S ¼ trðA1At
2Þ=p: Four scalars play a central role in the analysis:
m ¼ /S; IS; a2 ¼ jjS 	 mIjj2; b2 ¼ E½jjS 	 Sjj2
; and d2 ¼ E½jjS 	 mIjj2
: We do not
need to assume that the random variables in X follow a speciﬁc distribution, but we
do need to assume that they have ﬁnite fourth moments, so that b2 and d2 are ﬁnite.
The following relationship holds.
Lemma 2.1. a2 þ b2 ¼ d2:
Proof.
E½jjS 	 mIjj2
 ¼ E½jjS 	 S þ S 	 mIjj2
ð1Þ
¼ E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 þ E½jjS 	 mIjj2
 þ 2E½/S 	 S; S 	 mIS
ð2Þ
¼ E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 þ jjS 	 mIjj2 þ 2/E½S 	 S
; S 	 mIS:
ð3Þ
Notice that E½S
 ¼ S; therefore, the third term on the right-hand side of Eq. (3) is
equal to zero. This completes the proof of Theorem 2.1.
&
The optimal linear combination S ¼ r1I þ r2S of the identity matrix I and the
sample covariance matrix S is the standard solution to a simple quadratic
programming problem under linear equality constraint.
Theorem 2.1. Consider the optimization problem:
min
r1;r2 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
s:t: S ¼ r1I þ r2S;
ð4Þ
where the coefﬁcients r1 and r2 are nonrandom. Its solution veriﬁes:
S ¼ b2
d2 mI þ a2
d2 S;
ð5Þ
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 ¼ a2b2
d2 :
ð6Þ
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
368


PAGE 5
Proof. By a change of variables, problem (4) can be rewritten as:
min
r;n E½jjS 	 Sjj2
s:t: S ¼ rnI þ ð1 	 rÞS:
ð7Þ
With a little algebra, and using E½S
 ¼ S as in the proof of Lemma 2.1, we can
rewrite the objective as
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 ¼ r2jjS 	 nIjj2 þ ð1 	 rÞ2E½jjS 	 Sjj2
:
ð8Þ
Therefore, the optimal value of n can be obtained as the solution to a reduced
problem that does not depend on r: minn jjS 	 nIjj2: Remember that the norm of the
identity is one by convention, so the objective of this problem can be rewritten as
jjS 	 nIjj2 ¼ jjSjj2 	 2n/S; IS þ n2: The ﬁrst-order condition is: 	2/S; IS þ 2n ¼
0: The solution is: n ¼ /S; IS ¼ m: Replacing n by its optimal value m in Eq. (8),
we can rewrite the objective of the original problem as E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 ¼ r2a2þ
ð1 	 rÞ2b2: The ﬁrst-order condition is: 2ra2 	 2ð1 	 rÞb2 ¼ 0: The solution is:
r ¼ b2=ða2 þ b2Þ ¼ b2=d2: Note that 1 	 r ¼ a2=d2: At the optimum, the objective is
equal to: ðb2=d2Þ2a2 þ ða2=d2Þ2b2 ¼ a2b2=d2: This completes the proof.
&
Note that mI can be interpreted as a shrinkage target and the weight b2=d2 placed
on mI as a shrinkage intensity. The percentage relative improvement in average loss
(PRIAL) over the sample covariance matrix is equal to
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 	 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
¼ b2
d2;
ð9Þ
same as the shrinkage intensity. Therefore, everything is controlled by the ratio
b2=d2; which is a properly normalized measure of the error of the sample covariance
matrix S: Intuitively, if S is relatively accurate, then you should not shrink it too
much, and shrinking it will not help you much either; if S is relatively inaccurate,
then you should shrink it a lot, and you also stand to gain a lot from shrinking.
2.2. Interpretations
The mathematics underlying Theorem 2.1 are so rich that we are able to provide
four complementary interpretations of it. One is geometric and the others echo some
of the most important ideas in ﬁnite sample multivariate statistics. First, we can see
Theorem 2.1 as a projection theorem in Hilbert space. The appropriate Hilbert space
is the space of p-dimensional symmetric random matrices A such that E½jjAjj2
oN:
The associated norm is, of course,
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½jj  jj2
q
; and the inner product of two random
matrices A1 and A2 is E½/A1; A2S
: With this structure, Lemma 2.1 is just a rewriting
of the Pythagorean Theorem. Furthermore, formula (5) can be justiﬁed as follows: In
order to project the true covariance matrix S onto the space spanned by the identity
matrix I and the sample covariance matrix S; we ﬁrst project it onto the line spanned
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
369


PAGE 6
by the identity, which yields the shrinkage target mI; then we project S onto the line
joining the shrinkage target mI to the sample covariance matrix S: Whether the
projection S ends up closer to one end of the line ðmIÞ or to the other ðSÞ depends
on which one of them S was closer to. Fig. 1 provides a geometrical illustration.
The second way to interpret Theorem 2.1 is as a trade-off between bias and
variance. We seek to minimize mean squared error, which can be decomposed into
variance and squared bias:
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 ¼ E½jjS 	 E½S
jj2
 þ jjE½S
 	 Sjj2:
ð10Þ
The mean squared error of the shrinkage target mI is all bias and no variance, while
for the sample covariance matrix S it is exactly the opposite: all variance and no bias.
S represents the optimal trade-off between error due to bias and error due to
variance. See Fig. 2 for an illustration. The idea of a trade-off between bias and
variance was already central to the original James and Stein [11] shrinkage
technique.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 1. Theorem 2.1 interpreted as a projection in Hilbert space.
Fig. 2. Theorem 2.1 interpreted as a trade-off between bias and variance: Shrinkage intensity zero
corresponds to the sample covariance matrix S: Shrinkage intensity one corresponds to the shrinkage
target mI: Optimal shrinkage intensity (represented by ) corresponds to the minimum expected loss
combination S:
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
370


PAGE 7
The third interpretation is Bayesian. S can be seen as the combination of two
signals: prior information and sample information. Prior information states that the
true covariance matrix S lies on the sphere centered around the shrinkage target mI
with radius a: Sample information states that S lies on another sphere, centered
around the sample covariance matrix S with radius b: Bringing together prior and
sample information, S must lie on the intersection of the two spheres, which is a
circle. At the center of this circle stands S: The relative importance given to prior vs.
sample information in determining S depends on which one is more accurate.
Strictly speaking, a full Bayesian approach would specify not only the support of the
distribution of S; but also the distribution itself. We could assume that S is
uniformly distributed on the sphere, but it might be difﬁcult to justify. Thus, S
should not be thought of as the expectation of the posterior distribution, as is
traditional, but rather as the center of mass of its support. See Fig. 3 for an
illustration. The idea of drawing inspiration from the Bayesian perspective to obtain
an improved estimator of the covariance matrix was used by Haff [8].
The fourth and last interpretation involves the cross-sectional dispersion of
covariance matrix eigenvalues. Let l1; y; lp denote the eigenvalues of the true
covariance matrix S; and l1; y; lp those of the sample covariance matrix S: We can
exploit the Frobenius norm’s elegant relationship to eigenvalues. Note that
m ¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
li ¼ E 1
p
X
p
i¼1
li
"
#
ð11Þ
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 3. Bayesian interpretation: The left sphere has center mI and radius a and represents prior
information. The right sphere has center S and radius b: The distance between sphere centers is d and
represents sample information. If all we knew was that the true covariance matrix S lies on the left sphere,
our best guess would be its center: the shrinkage target mI: If all we knew was that the true covariance
matrix S lies on the right sphere, our best guess would be its center: the sample covariance matrix S:
Putting together both pieces of information, the true covariance matrix S must lie on the circle where the
two spheres intersect; therefore, our best guess is its center: the optimal linear shrinkage S:
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
371


PAGE 8
represents the grand mean of both true and sample eigenvalues. Then Lemma 2.1
can be rewritten as
1
p E
X
p
i¼1
ðli 	 mÞ2
"
#
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðli 	 mÞ2 þ E½jjS 	 Sjj2
:
ð12Þ
In words, sample eigenvalues are more dispersed around their grand mean than true
ones, and the excess dispersion is equal to the error of the sample covariance matrix.
Excess dispersion implies that the largest sample eigenvalues are biased upwards,
and the smallest ones downwards. See Fig. 4 for an illustration. Therefore, we can
improve upon the sample covariance matrix by shrinking its eigenvalues towards
their grand mean, as in
8i ¼ 1; y; p
l
i ¼ b2
d2 m þ a2
d2 li:
ð13Þ
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 4. Sample vs. true eigenvalues: The solid line represents the distribution of the eigenvalues of the
sample covariance matrix. Eigenvalues are sorted from largest to smallest, then plotted against their rank.
In this case, the true covariance matrix is the identity, that is, the true eigenvalues are all equal to one. The
distribution of true eigenvalues is plotted as a dashed horizontal line at one. Distributions are obtained in
the limit as the number of observations n and the number of variables p both go to inﬁnity with the ratio
p=n converging to a ﬁnite positive limit. The four plots correspond to different values of this limit.
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
372


PAGE 9
Note that l
1; y; l
p deﬁned by Eq. (13) are precisely the eigenvalues of S:
Surprisingly, their dispersion E½Pp
i¼1ðl
i 	 mÞ2
=p ¼ a2=d is even below the dispersion
of true eigenvalues. For the interested reader, the next subsection explains why.
The idea that shrinking sample eigenvalues towards their grand mean yields an
improved estimator of the covariance matrix was highlighted in Muirhead’s [18]
review paper.
2.3. Further results on sample eigenvalues
The following paragraphs contain additional insights about the eigenvalues of the
sample covariance matrix, but the reader can skip them and go directly to Section 3
if he or she so wishes. We discuss: (1) why the eigenvalues of the sample covariance
matrix are more dispersed than those of the true covariance matrix (Eq. (12));
(2) how important this effect is in practice; and (3) why we should use instead an
estimator whose eigenvalues are less dispersed than those of the true covariance
matrix (Eq. (13)). The explanation relies on a result from matrix algebra.
Theorem 2.2. The eigenvalues are the most dispersed diagonal elements that can be
obtained by rotation.
Proof. Let R denote a p-dimensional symmetric matrix and V a p-dimensional
rotation matrix: VV 0 ¼ V0V ¼ I: First, note that ð1=pÞtrðV0RVÞ ¼ ð1=pÞtrðRÞ:
The average of the diagonal elements is invariant by rotation. Call it r: Let vi
denote the ith column of V: The dispersion of the diagonal elements of V 0RV
is
ð1=pÞ Pp
i¼1ðvi0Rvi 	 rÞ2:
Note
that
Pp
i¼1ðvi0Rvi 	 rÞ2 þ Pp
i¼1
Pp
j¼1
jaiðvi0RvjÞ2 ¼
tr½ðV 0RV 	 rIÞ2
 ¼ tr½ðR 	 rIÞ2
 is invariant by rotation. Therefore, the rotation V
maximizes the dispersion of the diagonal elements of V0RV if and only if it
minimizes Pp
i¼1
Pp
j¼1
jaiðvi0RvjÞ2: This is achieved by setting vi0Rvj to zero for all iaj:
In this case, V 0RV is a diagonal matrix, call it D: V 0RV ¼ D is equivalent to R ¼
VDV 0: Since V is a rotation and D is diagonal, the columns of V must contain the
eigenvectors of R and the diagonal of D its eigenvalues. Therefore, the dispersion of
the diagonal elements of V0RV is maximized when these diagonal elements are equal
to the eigenvalues of R: This completes the proof of Theorem 2.2.
&
Decompose the true covariance matrix into eigenvalues and eigenvectors: S ¼
G0LG; where L is a diagonal matrix, and G is a rotation matrix. The diagonal
elements of L are the eigenvalues l1; y; lp; and the columns of G are the
eigenvectors g1; y; gp: Similarly, decompose the sample covariance matrix into
eigenvalues and eigenvectors: S ¼ G0LG; where L is a diagonal matrix, and G is a
rotation matrix. The diagonal elements of L are the eigenvalues l1; y; lp; and the
columns of G are the eigenvectors g1; y; gp: Since S is unbiased and G is
nonstochastic, G0SG is an unbiased estimator of L ¼ G0SG: The diagonal elements of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
373


PAGE 10
G0SG are approximately as dispersed as the ones of G0SG: For convenience, let us
speak as if they were exactly as dispersed. By contrast, L ¼ G0SG is not at all an
unbiased estimator of G0SG: This is because the errors of G and S interact. Theorem
2.2 shows us the effect of this interaction: the diagonal elements of G0SG are more
dispersed than those of G0SG (and hence than those of G0SG). This is why sample
eigenvalues are more dispersed than true ones. See Table 1 for a summary.
We illustrate how important this effect is in a particular case: when the true
covariance matrix is the identity matrix. Let us sort the eigenvalues of the sample
covariance matrix from largest to smallest, and plot them against their rank. The
shape of the plot depends on the ratio p=n; but does not depend on the particular
realization of the sample covariance matrix, at least approximately when p and n are
very large. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of sample eigenvalues for various values of
the ratio p=n: This ﬁgure is based on the asymptotic formula proven by Marcˇ enko
and Pastur [17]. We notice that the largest sample eigenvalues are severely biased
upwards, and the smallest ones downwards. The bias increases in p=n: This
phenomenon is very general and is not limited to the identity case. It is similar to the
effect observed by Brown [3] in Monte-Carlo simulations. Finally, let us remark that
the sample eigenvalues li ¼ gi0Sgi should not be compared to the true eigenvalues
li ¼ gi
0Sgi; but to gi0Sgi: We should compare estimated vs. true variance associated
with vector gi: By Theorem 2.2 again, the diagonal elements of G0SG are even less
dispersed than those of G0SG: Not only are sample eigenvalues more dispersed than
true ones, but they should be less dispersed. This effect is attributable to error in the
sample eigenvectors. Intuitively: Statisticians should shy away from taking a strong
stance on extremely small and extremely large eigenvalues, because they know that
they have the wrong eigenvectors. The sample covariance matrix is guilty of taking an
unjustiﬁably strong stance. The optimal linear shrinkage S corrects for that.
3. Analysis under general asymptotics
In the previous section, we have shown that S has an appealing optimality
property and ﬁts well in the existing literature. It has only one drawback: it is not a
bona ﬁde estimator, since it requires hindsight knowledge of four scalar functions of
the true (and unobservable) covariance matrix S: m; a2; b2 and d2: We now address
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 1
Dispersion of diagonal elements
G0SG
!
G0SG
ww
G0SG
g
G0SG
This table compares the dispersion of the diagonal elements of certain products of matrices. The symbols
!; E; and g pertain to diagonal elements, and mean less dispersed than, approximately as dispersed as,
and more dispersed than, respectively.
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
374


PAGE 11
this problem. The idea is that, asymptotically, there exists consistent estimators for
m; a2; b2 and d2; hence for S too. At this point, we need to choose an appropriate
asymptotic framework. Standard asymptotics consider p ﬁxed while n tends to
inﬁnity, implying that the optimal shrinkage intensity vanishes in the limit. This
would be reasonable for situations where p is very small in comparison to n:
However, in the problems of interest to us p tends to be of the same order as n and
can even be larger. Hence, we consider it more appropriate to use a framework that
reﬂects this condition. This is achieved by allowing the number of variables p to go to
inﬁnity at the same speed as the number of observations n: It is called general
asymptotics. In this framework, the optimal shrinkage intensity generally does not
vanish asymptotically but rather it tends to a limiting constant that we will be able to
estimate consistently. The idea then is to use the estimated shrinkage intensity in
order to arrive at a bona ﬁde estimator. To the best of our knowledge, the framework
of general asymptotics has not been used before to improve over the sample
covariance matrix, but only to characterize the distribution of its eigenvalues, as in
Silverstein [20]. We are also aware of the work of Girko [5–7] who employed the
framework of Kolmogorov asymptotics, where the ratio p=n tends to a positive, ﬁnite
constant. Girko proves consistency and asymptotic normality of so-called G-
estimators of certain functions of the covariance matrix. In particular, he
demonstrates the element-wise consistency of a G3-estimator of the inverse of the
covariance matrix.
3.1. General asymptotics
Let n ¼ 1; 2; y index a sequence of statistical models. For every n; Xn is a pn  n
matrix of n iid observations on a system of pn random variables with mean zero and
covariance matrix Sn: The number of variables pn can change and even go to inﬁnity
with the number of observations n; but not too fast.
Assumption 1. There exists a constant K1 independent of n such that pn=npK1:
Assumption 1 is very weak. It does not require pn to change and go to inﬁnity;
therefore, standard asymptotics are included as a particular case. It is not even
necessary for the ratio pn=n to converge to any limit. Decompose the covariance
matrix into eigenvalues and eigenvectors: Sn ¼ GnLnGt
n; where Ln is a diagonal
matrix, and Gn a rotation matrix. The diagonal elements of Ln are the eigenvalues
ln
1; y; ln
pn; and the columns of Gn are the eigenvectors gn
1; y; gn
pn: Yn ¼ Gt
nXn
is a pn  n matrix of n iid observations on a system of pn uncorrelated random
variables that spans the same space as the original system. We impose restrictions on
the higher moments of Yn: Let ðyn
11; y; yn
pn1Þt denote the ﬁrst column of the
matrix Yn:
Assumption
2. There
exists
a
constant
K2
independent
of
n
such
that
1
pn
Ppn
i¼1 E½ðyn
i1Þ8
pK2:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
375


PAGE 12
Assumption 3.
lim
n-N
p2
n
n2 
P
ði; j;k;lÞAQnðCov½yn
i1yn
j1; yn
k1yn
l1
Þ2
Cardinal of Qn
¼ 0;
where Qn denotes the set of all the quadruples that are made of four distinct integers
between 1 and pn:
Assumption 2 states that the eighth moment is bounded (on average). Assumption
3 states that products of uncorrelated random variables are themselves uncorrelated
(on average, in the limit). In the case where general asymptotics degenerate into
standard asymptotics ðpn=n-0Þ; Assumption 3 is trivially veriﬁed as a consequence
of Assumption 2. Assumption 3 is veriﬁed when random variables are normally or
even elliptically distributed, but it is much weaker than that. Assumptions 1–3 are
implicit throughout the paper. We suggest to use a matrix norm based on the
Frobenius norm. The idea is that a norm of the pn-dimensional matrix A can be
speciﬁed as jjAjj2
n ¼ f ðpnÞ trðAAtÞ; where f ðpnÞ is a scalar function of the dimension.
This deﬁnes a quadratic form on the linear space of pn-dimensional symmetric
matrices whose associated inner product is /A1; A2Sn ¼ f ðpnÞtrðA1At
2Þ: The
behavior of jj  jjn across dimensions is controlled by the function f ðÞ: The norm
jj  jjn is used mainly to deﬁne a notion of consistency. A given estimator will be
called consistent if the norm of its difference with the true covariance matrix goes to
zero (in quadratic mean) as n goes to inﬁnity. If pn remains bounded, then all positive
functions f ðÞ generate equivalent notions of consistency. But this particular case
similar to standard asymptotics is not very representative. If pn (or a subsequence)
goes to inﬁnity, then the choice of f ðÞ becomes much more important. If f ðpnÞ is too
large (small) as pn goes to inﬁnity, then it will deﬁne too strong (weak) a notion of
consistency. f ðÞ must deﬁne the notion of consistency that is ‘‘just right’’ under
general asymptotics. Our solution is to deﬁne a relative norm. The norm of a pn-
dimensional matrix is divided by the norm of a benchmark matrix of the same
dimension pn: The benchmark must be chosen carefully. For lack of any other
attractive candidate, we take the identity matrix as benchmark. Therefore, by
convention, the identity matrix has norm one in every dimension. This determines
the function f ðÞ uniquely as f ðpnÞ ¼ 1=pn:
Deﬁnition 1. Our norm of the pn-dimensional matrix A is: jjAjj2
n ¼ trðAAtÞ=pn:
Intuitively, it seems that the norm of the identity matrix should remain bounded
away from zero and from inﬁnity as its dimension goes to inﬁnity. All choices of f ðÞ
satisfying this property would deﬁne equivalent notions of consistency. Therefore,
our particular norm is equivalent to any norm that would make sense under general
asymptotics. An example might help familiarize the reader with Deﬁnition 1. Let An
be the pn  pn matrix with one in its top left entry and zeros everywhere else. Let Zn
be the pn  pn matrix with zeros everywhere (i.e. the null matrix). An and Zn differ in
a way that is independent of pn: the top left entry is not the same. Yet their squared
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
376


PAGE 13
distance jjAn 	 Znjj2 ¼ 1=pn depends on pn: This apparent paradox has an intuitive
resolution. An and Zn disagree on the ﬁrst dimension, but they agree on the pn 	 1
others. The importance of their disagreement is relative to the extent of their
agreement. If pn ¼ 1; then An and Zn have nothing in common, and their distance is
1. If pn-N; then An and Zn have almost everything in common, and their distance
goes to 0. Thus, disagreeing on one entry can either be important (if this entry is the
only one) or negligible (if this entry is just one among a large number of others).
3.2. The behavior of the sample covariance matrix
Deﬁne the sample covariance matrix Sn ¼ XnX t
n=n: We follow the notation of
Section 2, except that we add the subscript n to signal that all results hold asymp-
totically. Thus, we have: mn ¼ /Sn; InSn; a2
n ¼ jjSn 	 mnInjj2
n; b2
n ¼ E½jjSn 	 Snjj2
n
;
and d2
n ¼ E½jjSn 	 mnInjj2
n
: These four scalars are well behaved asymptotically.
Lemma 3.1. mn; a2
n; b2
n and d2
n remain bounded as n-N:
They can go to zero in special cases, but in general they do not, in spite of the
division by pn in the deﬁnition of the norm. The proofs of all the technical results of
Section 3 are in Appendix A. The most basic question is whether the sample
covariance matrix is consistent under general asymptotics. Speciﬁcally, we ask
whether Sn converges in quadratic mean to the true covariance matrix, that is,
whether b2
n vanishes. In general, the answer is no, as shown below. The results stated
in Theorem 3.1 and Lemmata 3.2 and 3.3 are related to special cases of a general
result proven by Yin [25]. But we work under weaker assumptions than he does.
Also, his goal is to ﬁnd the distribution of the eigenvalues of the sample covariance
matrix, while ours is to ﬁnd an improved estimator of the covariance matrix.
Theorem 3.1. Deﬁne y2
n ¼ Var½ 1
pn
Ppn
i¼1ðyn
i1Þ2
: y2
n is bounded as n-N; and we have:
limn-N E½jjSn 	 Snjj2
n
 	 pn
n ðm2
n þ y2
nÞ ¼ 0:
Theorem 3.1 shows that the expected loss of the sample covariance matrix
E½jjSn 	 Snjj2
n
 is bounded, but it is at least of the order of pn
n m2
n; which does not
usually vanish. Therefore, the sample covariance matrix is not consistent under
general asymptotics, except in special cases. The ﬁrst special case is when pn=n-0:
For example, under standard asymptotics, pn is ﬁxed, and it is well-known that the
sample covariance matrix is consistent. Theorem 3.1 shows that consistency extends
to cases where pn is not ﬁxed, not even necessarily bounded, as long as it is of order
oðnÞ: The second special case is when m2
n-0 and y2
n-0: m2
n-0 implies that most of
the pn random variables have vanishing variances, i.e. they are asymptotically
degenerate. The number of random variables escaping degeneracy must be negligible
with respect to n: This is like the previous case, except that the oðnÞ nondegenerate
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
377


PAGE 14
random variables can now be augmented with OðnÞ degenerate ones. Overall, a loose
condition for the consistency of the sample covariance matrix under general
asymptotics is that the number of nondegenerate random variables be negligible with
respect to the number of observations. If the sample covariance matrix is not
consistent under general asymptotics, it is because of its off-diagonal elements.
Granted, the error on each one of them vanishes, but their number grows too fast.
The accumulation of a large number of small errors off the diagonal prevents the
sample covariance matrix from being consistent. By contrast, the contribution of the
errors on the diagonal is negligible. This is apparent from the proof of Theorem 3.1.
After all, it should in general not be possible to consistently estimate pnðpn þ 1Þ=2
parameters from a data set of n pn random realizations if these two numbers are of
the same order of magnitude. For this reason, we believe that there does not exist
any consistent estimator of the covariance matrix under general asymptotics.
Theorem 3.1 also shows what factors determine the error of Sn: The ﬁrst factor is the
ratio pn=n: It measures deviation from standard asymptotics. People often ﬁgure out
whether they can use asymptotics by checking whether they have enough
observations, but in this case it would be unwise: it is the ratio of observations to
variables that needs to be big. Two hundred observations might seem like a lot, but it
is not nearly enough if there are 100 variables: it would be about as bad as using two
observations to estimate the variance of 1 random variable! The second factor m2
n
simply gives the scale of the problem. The third factor y2
n measures covariance
between the squared variables over and above what is implied by covariance between
the variables themselves. For example, y2
n is zero in the normal case, but usually
positive in the elliptic case. Intuitively, a ‘‘cross-sectional’’ law of large numbers
could make the variance of p	1
n
Ppn
i¼1 y2
i1 vanish asymptotically as pn-N if the y2
i1’s
were sufﬁciently uncorrelated with one another. But Assumption 3 is too weak to
ensure that, so in general y2
n is not negligible, which might be more realistic
sometimes. This analysis enables us to answer another basic question: When does
shrinkage matter? Remember that b2
n ¼ E½jjSn 	 Snjj2
n
 denotes the error of the
sample covariance matrix, and that d2
n ¼ E½p	1
n
Ppn
i¼1ðln
i 	 mnÞ2
 denotes the cross-
sectional dispersion of the sample eigenvalues ln
1; y; ln
pn around the expectation of
their grand mean mn ¼ E½Ppn
i¼1 ln
i =pn
: Theorem 2.1 states that shrinkage matters
unless the ratio b2
n=d2
n is negligible, but this answer is rather abstract. Theorem 3.1
enables us to rewrite it in more intuitive terms. Ignoring the presence of y2
n; the error
of the sample covariance matrix b2
n is asymptotically close to pn
n m2
n: Therefore,
shrinkage matters unless the ratio of variables to observations pn=n is negligible with
respect to d2
n=m2
n; which is a scale-free measure of cross-sectional dispersion of sample
eigenvalues. Fig. 5 provides a graphical illustration.
This constitutes an easy diagnostic test to reveal whether our shrinkage method
can substantially improve upon the sample covariance matrix. In our opinion, there
are many important practical situations where shrinkage does matter according to
this criterion. Also, it is rather exceptional for gains from shrinkage to be as large as
pn=n; because most of the time ( for example in estimation of the mean) they are of
the much smaller order 1=n:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
378


PAGE 15
3.3. A consistent estimator for S
n
S
n is not a bona ﬁde estimator because it depends on the true covariance matrix
Sn; which is unobservable. Fortunately, computing S
n does not require knowledge
of the whole matrix Sn; but only of four scalar functions of Sn: mn; a2
n; b2
n and d2
n:
Given the size of the data set ðpn  nÞ; we cannot estimate all of Sn consistently,
but we can estimate the optimal shrinkage target, the optimal shrinkage intensity,
and even S
n itself consistently. For mn; a consistent estimator is its sample
counterpart.
Lemma 3.2. Deﬁne mn ¼ /Sn; InSn: Then E½mn
 ¼ mn for all n; and mn 	 mn converges
to zero in quartic mean ( fourth moment) as n goes to inﬁnity.
It implies that m2
n 	 m2
n !
q:m: 0 and mn 	 mn !
q:m: 0; where !
q:m: denotes convergence in
quadratic mean as n-N: A consistent estimator for d2
n ¼ E½jjSn 	 mnInjj2
n
 is also its
sample counterpart.
Lemma 3.3. Deﬁne d2
n ¼ jjSn 	 mnInjj2
n: Then d2
n 	 d2
n !
q:m: 0:
Now let the pn  1 vector xn
k denote the kth column of the observations matrix Xn;
for k ¼ 1; y; n: Sn ¼ n	1XnX t
n can be rewritten as Sn ¼ n	1 Pn
k¼1 xn
kðxn
kÞt: Sn is the
average of the matrices xn
kðxn
kÞt: Since the matrices xn
kðxn
kÞt are iid across k; we can
estimate the error b2
n ¼ E½jjSn 	 Snjj2
n
 of their average by seeing how far each one of
them deviates from the average.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 5. Optimal shrinkage intensity and PRIAL as function of eigenvalues dispersion and the ratio of
variables to observations: Note that eigenvalues dispersion is measured by the scale-free ratio d2
n=m2
n:
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
379


PAGE 16
Lemma
3.4. Deﬁne
%b2
n ¼ 1
n2
Pn
k¼1 jjxn
kðxn
kÞt 	 Snjj2
n
and
b2
n ¼ minð %b2
n; d2
nÞ:
Then
%b2
n 	 b2
n !
q:m: 0 and b2
n 	 b2
n !
q:m: 0:
We introduce the constrained estimator b2
n because b2
npd2
n by Lemma 2.1. In
general, this constraint is rarely binding. But it ensures that the following estimator
of a2
n is nonnegative.
Lemma 3.5. Deﬁne a2
n ¼ d2
n 	 b2
n: Then a2
n 	 a2
n !
q:m: 0:
The next step of the strategy is to replace the unobservable scalars in the formula
deﬁning S
n with consistent estimators, and to show that the asymptotic properties
are unchanged. This yields our bona ﬁde estimator of the covariance matrix:
S
n ¼ b2
n
d2
n
mnIn þ a2
n
d2
n
Sn:
ð14Þ
The next theorem shows that S
n has the same asymptotic properties as S
n: Thus, we
can neglect the error that we introduce when we replace the unobservable parameters
mn; a2
n; b2
n and d2
n by estimators.
Theorem 3.2. S
n is a consistent estimator of S
n; i.e. jjS
n 	 S
njjn !
q:m: 0: As a
consequence, S
n has the same asymptotic expected loss (or risk) as S
n; i.e.
E½jjS
n 	 Snjj2
n
 	 E½jjS
n 	 Snjj2
n
-0:
This justiﬁes our studying the properties of S
n in Section 2 ‘‘as if’’ it was a bona
ﬁde estimator. It is interesting to recall the Bayesian interpretation of S
n (see Section
2.2). From this point of view, S
n is an empirical Bayesian estimator. Empirical
Bayesians often ignore the fact that their prior contains estimation error because it
comes from the data. Usually, this is done without any rigorous justiﬁcation, and it
requires sophisticated ‘‘judgment’’ to pick an empirical Bayesian prior whose
estimation error is ‘‘not too’’ damaging. Here, we treat this issue rigorously instead:
We give a set of conditions (Assumptions 1–3) under which it is legitimate to neglect
the estimation error of our empirical Bayesian prior. Finally, it is possible to estimate
the expected quadratic loss of S
n and S
n consistently.
Lemma 3.6. E½ja2
nb2
n
d2n 	 a2
nb2
n
d2
n j
-0:
3.4. Optimality property of the estimator S
n
The ﬁnal step of our strategy is to demonstrate that S
n; which we obtained as a
consistent estimator for S
n; possesses an important optimality property. We already
know that S
n (hence, S
n in the limit) is optimal among the linear combinations of the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
380


PAGE 17
identity and the sample covariance matrix with nonrandom coefﬁcients (see Theorem
2.1). This is interesting, but only mildly so, because it excludes the other linear
shrinkage estimators with random coefﬁcients. In this section, we show that S
n is still
optimal within a bigger class: the linear combinations of In and Sn with random
coefﬁcients. This class includes both the linear combinations that represent bona ﬁde
estimators, and those with coefﬁcients that require hindsight knowledge of the true
(and unobservable) covariance matrix Sn: Let S
n denote the linear combination of
In and Sn with minimum quadratic loss. It solves:
min
r1;r2 jjS
n 	 Snjj2
n
s:t: S
n ¼ r1In þ r2Sn:
ð15Þ
In contrast to the optimization problem in Theorem 2.1 with solution S
n; here we
minimize the loss instead of the expected loss, and we allow the coefﬁcients r1 and r2
to be random. It turns out that the formula for S
n is a function of Sn; therefore, S
n
does not constitute a bona ﬁde estimator. By construction, S
n has lower loss than S
n
and S
n almost surely (a.s.), but asymptotically it makes no difference.
Theorem 3.3. S
n is a consistent estimator of S
n ; i.e. jjS
n 	 S
n jjn !
q:m: 0: As a
consequence, S
n has the same asymptotic expected loss (or risk) as S
n ; that is,
E½jjS
n 	 Snjj2
n
 	 E½jjS
n 	 Snjj2
n
-0:
Both S
n and S
n have the same asymptotic properties as S
n; therefore, they also
have the same asymptotic properties as each other. The most important result of this
paper is the following: The bona ﬁde estimator S
n has uniformly minimum quadratic
risk asymptotically among all the linear combinations of the identity with the sample
covariance matrix, including those that are bona ﬁde estimators, and even those that
use hindsight knowledge of the true covariance matrix.
Theorem 3.4. For any sequence of linear combinations #Sn of the identity and the
sample covariance matrix, the estimator S
n deﬁned in Eq. (14) veriﬁes:
lim
N-N inf
nXN ðE½jj #Sn 	 Snjj2
n
 	 E½jjS
n 	 Snjj2
n
ÞX0:
ð16Þ
In addition, every #Sn that performs as well as S
n is identical to S
n in the limit:
lim
n-N ðE½jj #Sn 	 Snjj2
n
 	 E½jjS
n 	 Snjj2
n
Þ ¼ 0 3 jj #Sn 	 S
njjn !
q:m: 0:
ð17Þ
Thus, it is legitimate to say that S
n is an asymptotically optimal linear shrinkage
estimator of the covariance matrix with respect to quadratic loss under general
asymptotics. Typically, only maximum likelihood estimators have such a sweeping
optimality property, so we believe that this result is unique in shrinkage theory. Yet
another distinctive feature of S
n is that, to the best of our knowledge, it is the only
estimator of the covariance matrix to retain a rigorous justiﬁcation when the number
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
381


PAGE 18
of variables pn exceeds the number of observations n: Not only that, but S
n is
guaranteed to be always invertible, even in the case pn4n; where rank deﬁciency
makes the sample covariance matrix singular. Estimating the inverse covariance
matrix
when
variables
outnumber
observations
is
sometimes
dismissed
as
impossible, but the existence of ðS
nÞ	1 certainly proves otherwise. The following
theorem shows that S
n is usually well-conditioned.
Theorem 3.5. Assume that the condition number of the true covariance matrix Sn is
bounded, and that the normalized variables yi1=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃli
p
are iid across i ¼ 1; y; n: Then the
condition number of the estimator S
n is bounded in probability.
This result follows from powerful results proven recently by probabilists [2].
If the cross-sectional iid assumption is violated, it does not mean that the
condition number goes to inﬁnity, but rather that it is technically too difﬁcult
to ﬁnd out anything about it. Interestingly, there is one case where the estimator
S
n
is
even
better-conditioned
than
the
true
covariance
matrix
Sn:
if
the
ill-conditioning of Sn comes from eigenvalues close to zero (multicollinearity
in the variables) and the ratio of variables to observations pn=n is not negligible.
In this case, S
n is well-conditioned because the sample observations do not
provide enough information to update our prior belief that there is no multi-
collinearity.
Remark 3.1. An alternative technique to arrive at an invertible estimator of the
covariance matrix is based on an maximum entropy (ME) approach; e.g., see Theil
and Laitinen [23] and Vinod [24]. The motivation comes from considering variables
subject to ‘‘rounding’’ or other measurement error; the measurement error
corresponding to variable i is quantiﬁed by a positive number di; i ¼ 1; y; p: The
resulting covariance matrix estimator of Vinod [24], say, is then given by Sn þ Dn;
where Dn is a diagonal matrix with ith element d2
i =3: While this estimator certainly is
invertible, it was not derived having in mind any optimality considerations with
respect to estimating the true covariance matrix. For example, if the measurement
errors, and hence the di; are small, Sn þ Dn will be close to Sn and inherit its ill-
conditioning. Therefore, the Maximum Entropy estimators do not seem very
interesting for our purposes.
4. Monte-Carlo simulations
The goal is to compare the expected loss (or risk) of various estimators across a
wide range of situations. The benchmark is the expected loss of the sample
covariance matrix. We report the percentage relative improvement in average loss
of S; deﬁned as: PRIALðSÞ ¼ ðE½jjS 	 Sjj2
 	 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
Þ=E½jjS 	 Sjj2
  100:
The subscript n is omitted for brevity, since no confusion is possible. If the PRIAL is
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
382


PAGE 19
positive (negative), then S performs better (worse) than S: The PRIAL of the
sample covariance matrix S is zero by deﬁnition. The PRIAL cannot exceed 100%.
We compare the PRIAL of S to the PRIAL of other estimators from ﬁnite sample
decision theory.
4.1. Other estimators
There are many estimators worthy of investigation, and we cannot possibly study
all the interesting ones, but we attempt to compose a representative selection.
4.1.1. Empirical Bayesian
Haff [8] introduces an estimator with an empirical Bayesian inspiration. Like S; it
is a linear combination of the sample covariance matrix and the identity. The
difference lies in the coefﬁcients of the combination. Haff’s coefﬁcients do not
depend on the observations X; only on p and n: If the criterion is the mean squared
error, Haff’s approach suggests
ˆSEB ¼ pn 	 2n 	 2
pn2
mEBI þ
n
n þ 1 S
ð18Þ
with mEB ¼ ½detðSÞ
1=p: When p4n we take mEB ¼ m because the regular formula
would yield zero. The initials EB stand for empirical Bayesian.
4.1.2. Stein–Haff
Stein [21] proposes an estimator that keeps the eigenvectors of the sample
covariance matrix and replaces its eigenvalues l1; y; lp by
nli
n 	 p þ 1 þ 2li
X
p
j¼1
jai
1
li 	 lj
0
B
@
1
C
A
,
i ¼ 1; y; p:
ð19Þ
These corrected eigenvalues need neither be positive nor in the same order as
sample eigenvalues. To prevent this from happening, an ad hoc procedure
called isotonic regression is applied before recombining corrected eigenvalues
with sample eigenvectors.2 Haff [9] independently obtains a closely related
estimator. In any given simulation, we call ˆSSH the better performing estimator
of the two. The other one is not reported. The initials SH stand for Stein and
Haff.3
ARTICLE IN PRESS
2Intuitively, isotonic regression restores the ordering by assigning the same value to a subsequence of
corrected eigenvalues that would violate it. Lin and Perlman [15] explain it in detail.
3When p4n some of the terms *li 	 *lj in formula (9) result in a division by zero. We just ignore them.
Nonetheless, when p is too large compared to n; the isotonic regression does not converge. In this case, ˆSSH
does not exist.
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
383


PAGE 20
4.1.3. Minimax
Stein [22] and Dey and Srinivasan [4] both derive the same estimator. Under a
certain loss function, it is minimax, which means that no other estimator has lower
worst-case error. The minimax criterion is sometimes criticized as overly pessimistic,
since it looks at the worst case only. This estimator preserves sample eigenvectors
and replaces sample eigenvalues by
n
n þ p þ 1 	 2i
*li;
ð20Þ
where sample eigenvalues l1; y; lp are sorted in descending order. We call this
estimator ˆSMX; where the initials MX stand for minimax.
4.1.4. Computational cost
When the number of variables p is very large, S and S take much less time to
compute than
ˆSEB;
ˆSSH and
ˆSMX; because they do not need eigenvalues and
determinants. Indeed the number and nature of operations needed to compute S are
of the same order as for S: It can be an enormous advantage in practice. The only
seemingly slow step is the estimation of b2; but it can be accelerated by writing
b2 ¼ 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
1
nðX 42ÞðX 42Þt


ij
	 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
1
n XX t

42
"
#
ij
;
ð21Þ
where ½
ij denotes the entry ði; jÞ of a matrix and the symbol 4 denotes elementwise
exponentiation, that is, ½A42
ij ¼ ð½A
ijÞ2 for any matrix A:
4.2. Experiment design
The random variables used in the simulations are normally distributed. The true
covariance matrix S is diagonal without loss of generality. Its eigenvalues are drawn
according to a log-normal distribution. Their grand mean m is set equal to one
without loss of generality. The structure of the Monte-Carlo experiment is as
follows. We identify three parameters as inﬂuential on the results: (1) the ratio p=n of
variables to observations, (2) the cross-sectional dispersion of population eigenvalues
a2; and (3) the product p  n which measures how close we are to asymptotic
conditions. For each one of these three parameters we choose a central value, namely
1=2 for p=n; 1=2 for a2; and 800 for p  n: First, we run the simulations with each of
the three parameters set to its central value. Then, we run three different sets of
simulations, allowing one of the three parameters to vary around its central value,
while the two others remain ﬁxed at their central value. This enables us to study the
inﬂuence of each parameter separately. To get a point of reference for the shrinkage
estimator S; we can compute analytically its asymptotic PRIAL, as implied by
Theorems 2.1, 3.1 and 3.2: it is
p=n
p=nþa2  100: This is the ‘‘speed of light’’ that we
would attain if we knew the true parameters m; a2; b2; d2; instead of having to
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
384


PAGE 21
estimate them. In the real world, we can never get this much improvement, and how
close we get depends on how valid the asymptotic approximations are.
4.3. Main results
When all three parameters are ﬁxed at their respective central values, we get the
results in Table 2.
‘‘Risk’’ means the average loss over 1000 simulations. For the central values of the
parameters, the asymptotic PRIAL of S is equal to 50%, and its simulated PRIAL
is 49:3%: Therefore, asymptotic behavior is almost attained in this case for p ¼ 20
and n ¼ 40: S improves substantially over S and ˆSEB; and moderately over ˆSSH
and ˆSMX:
4.3.1. Inﬂuence of ratio p=n
When we increase p=n from zero to inﬁnity, the asymptotic PRIAL of S increases
from 0 to 100% with an ‘‘S’’ shape. Fig. 6 conﬁrms this.4
S always has lower risk than S and ˆSEB: It usually has slightly lower risk than ˆSSH
and ˆSMX: ˆSSH is not deﬁned for high values of p=n: ˆSMX performs slightly better than
S for the highest values of p=n: This may be due to the fact that S does not attain
its asymptotic performance for values of n below 10.
4.3.2. Inﬂuence of dispersion a2
When we increase a2 from zero to inﬁnity, the asymptotic PRIAL of S decreases
from 100% to 0% with a reverse ‘‘S’’ shape. Fig. 7 conﬁrms this.
S has lower mean squared error than S always, and than ˆSEB almost always. S
always has lower mean squared error than ˆSSH and ˆSMX: When a2 gets too large, ˆSSH
and ˆSMX perform worse than the sample covariance matrix. The reason is that true
eigenvalues are very dispersed, and they shrink sample eigenvalues together too
much. This may be due to the fact that ˆSSH and ˆSMX were originally derived under
another loss function than the Frobenius norm. It is very reassuring that, even in a
case where some of its competitors perform much worse than S; S performs at least
as well as S:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 2
Result of 1000 Monte-Carlo simulations for central parameter values
Estimator
S
S
ˆSEB
ˆSSH
ˆSMX
Risk
0.5372
0.2723
0.5120
0.3076
0.3222
Standard error on risk
(0.0033)
(0.0013)
(0.0031)
(0.0014)
(0.0014)
PRIAL
0.0%
49.3%
4.7%
42.7%
40.0%
4Corresponding tables of results are available from the authors upon request. Standard errors on
simulated risk have the same order of magnitude as in Table 2.
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
385


PAGE 22
4.3.3. Inﬂuence of product p  n
When we increase pn from zero to inﬁnity, we should see the PRIAL of S
converge to its asymptotic value of 50%. Fig. 8 conﬁrms this.
S always has lower risk than S and ˆSEB: It has moderately lower risk than ˆSSH
and ˆSMX; except when n is below 20. When n is below 20, S performs slightly worse
than ˆSSH and moderately worse than ˆSMX; but still substantially better than S
and ˆSEB:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 6. Effect of the ratio of number of variables to number of observations on the PRIAL: ˆSSH is not
deﬁned when p=n42 because the isotonic regression does not converge.
Fig. 7. Effect of the dispersion of eigenvalues on the PRIAL.
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
386


PAGE 23
4.3.4. Other simulations
Simulations not reported here study departures from normality. These departures
have very little impact on the above results. In relative terms, S and ˆSEB appear to
suffer the most; then ˆSSH and ˆSMX; and S appears to suffer the least.
4.3.5. Summary of main results
We draw the following conclusions from these simulations. The asymptotic theory
developed in Section 3 approximates ﬁnite sample behavior well, as soon as n and p
become of the order of 20. S improves over the sample covariance matrix in every
one of the situations simulated, and usually by a lot. It also improves over ˆSEB in
almost every situation simulated, and usually by a lot too. S never performs
substantially worse than ˆSSH and ˆSMX; often performs about as well or slightly
better, and in some cases does substantially better. In the cases where ˆSSH or ˆSMX do
better, it is attributable to small sample size (less than ten).5
4.4. Complementary results on the condition number
This section studies the condition number of the estimator S in ﬁnite sample. The
procedure for the Monte-Carlo simulations is the same as in Section 4.3, except that
we do not compute the other estimators ˆSEB; ˆSSH and ˆSMX: Figs. 9–11 plot the
behavior of the condition number when p=n varies, when a2=m2 varies, and when pn
varies, respectively. The graphs show the average condition number over 1000
replications for the sample covariance matrix S and for the improved estimator S:
They also show the condition number of the true covariance matrix for comparison.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 8. Effect of the product of variables by observations on the PRIAL.
5We acknowledge that ˆSSH and ˆSMX were designed with another criterion than the Frobenius norm in
mind. Our conclusions say nothing about performance under any other criterion. Nonetheless, the
Frobenius norm is an important criterion.
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
387


PAGE 24
We can see that the sample covariance matrix is always worse-conditioned than
the true covariance matrix, while our estimator is always better-conditioned.
This suggests that the asymptotic result proven in Theorem 3.5 holds well in ﬁnite
sample.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we have discussed the estimation of large-dimensional covariance
matrices where the number of (iid) variables is not small compared to the sample
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 9. Effect of the ratio of number of variables to number of observations on the condition number.
Fig. 10. Effect of the dispersion of eigenvalues on the condition number: Even for small dispersions, the
condition number of S is 3–10 times bigger than the true condition number, while the condition number of
S is 2–5 times smaller than the true one.
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
388


PAGE 25
size. It is well-known that in such situations the usual estimator, the sample
covariance matrix, is ill-conditioned and may not even be invertible. The approach
suggested is to shrink the sample covariance matrix towards the identity matrix,
which means to consider a convex linear combination of these two matrices. The
practical problem is to determine the shrinkage intensity, that is, the amount of
shrinkage of the sample covariance matrix towards the identity matrix. To solve this
problem, we considered a general asymptotics framework where the number of
variables is allowed to tend to inﬁnity with the sample size. It was seen that under
mild conditions the optimal shrinkage intensity then tends to a limiting constant;
here, optimality is meant with respect to a quadratic loss function based on the
Frobenius norm. It was shown that the asymptotically optimal shrinkage intensity
can be estimated consistently, which leads to a feasible estimator. Both the
asymptotic results and the extensive Monte-Carlo simulations presented in this
paper indicate that the suggested shrinkage estimator can serve as an all-purpose
alternative to the sample covariance matrix. It has smaller risk and is better-
conditioned. This is especially true when the dimension of the covariance matrix is
large compared to the sample size.
Acknowledgments
We thank Petr Adamek, Dimitri Bertsimas, Minh Chau, Whitney Newey, Firooz
Partovi, Pedro Santa-Clara and especially Tim Crack and Jack Silverstein for their
valuable feedback. Also, the paper has beneﬁted from seminar participants at MIT,
the NBER, UCLA, Washington University in Saint Louis, Yale, Chicago, Wharton
and UBC. Last but not least, the helpful comments of anonymous referee have led to
an improved presentation. Errors are still our own.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 11. Effect of the product of variables by observations on the condition number.
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
389


PAGE 26
Appendix A. Proofs of the technical results in Section 3
For brevity, we omit the subscript n; but it is understood that everything
depends on n: The notation is as follows. The elements of the true covariance
matrix S are called sij: S can be decomposed into S ¼ GLG0; where L is a diagonal
matrix, and G is a rotation matrix. We denote the elements of L by lij; thus lij ¼ 0
for iaj; and the eigenvalues of S are called lii: This differs from the body of the
paper, where the eigenvalues are called li instead, but no confusion should be
possible. We use the matrix U to rotate the data: Y ¼ UtX is a p  n matrix of n iid
observations on a system of p random variables with mean zero and covariance
matrix L:
A.1. Proof of Lemma 3.1
Since the Frobenius norm is invariant by rotation, we have
jjSjj2 ¼ jjLjj2 ¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y2
i1
2p1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
p
Xp
i¼1 E½y8
i1
s
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
;
where the constant K2 is deﬁned by Assumption 2. Therefore, the norm of the true
covariance matrix remains bounded as n goes to inﬁnity. This implies that m ¼
/S; ISnpjjSjj is bounded too (remember that Deﬁnition 1 assigns norm one to the
identity). Also, a2 ¼ jjS 	 mIjj2 ¼ jjSjj2 	 m2 remains bounded as n goes to inﬁnity.
Furthermore, we have:
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 ¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E
1
n
X
n
k¼1
xikxjk 	 sij
 
!2
2
4
3
5
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E
1
n
X
n
k¼1
yikyjk 	 lij
 
!2
2
4
3
5
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
Var 1
n
X
n
k¼1
yikyjk
"
#
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
1
n Var½yi1yj1
p 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E½y2
i1y2
j1
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
390


PAGE 27
p 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
j1
q
p p
n
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
 
!2
p p
n
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
 
!
p p
n
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
p
Xp
i¼1 E½y8
i1
s
p K1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
;
where the constants K1 and K2 are deﬁned by Assumptions 1 and 2, respectively. It
shows that b2 remains bounded as n goes to inﬁnity. Finally, by Lemma 2.1,
d2 ¼ a2 þ b2 also remains bounded as n goes to inﬁnity.
&
A.2. Proof of Theorem 3.1
We have
m2 þ y2 ¼
E 1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
"
#
 
!2
þVar 1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
"
#
¼ E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
 
!2
2
4
3
5
¼ 1
p2
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E½y2
i1y2
j1
p 1
p2
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
j1
q
p
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
 
!2
p 1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
p
Xp
i¼1 E½y8
i1
s
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
391


PAGE 28
Therefore, y2 remains bounded as n goes to inﬁnity. We can rewrite the expected
quadratic loss of the sample covariance matrix as
b2 ¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E
1
n
X
n
k¼1
yikyjk 	 lij
 
!2
2
4
3
5
¼ 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E½ðyi1yj1 	 lijÞ2
¼ 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E½y2
i1y2
j1
 	 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
l2
ij
¼ p
nðm2 þ y2Þ 	 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
l2
ii:
The last term on the right-hand side of the last equation veriﬁes
1
pn
X
p
i¼1
l2
ii ¼ 1
n
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y2
i1
2
 
!
p1
n
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
 
!
p 1
n
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
p
Xp
i¼1 E½y8
i1
s
p1
n
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
;
therefore, the difference b2 	 p
nðm2 þ y2Þ converges to zero as n goes to inﬁnity.
&
A.3. Proof of Lemma 3.2
The proof of the ﬁrst statement is
E½m
 ¼ E½/S; IS
 ¼ /E½S
; IS ¼ /S; IS ¼ m:
Consider the second statement:
E½ðm 	 mÞ4
 ¼ E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
1
n
X
n
k¼1
ðy2
ik 	 liiÞ
(
)4
2
4
3
5
¼ E
1
n
X
n
k¼1
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik 	 liiÞ
(
)4
2
4
3
5
¼ 1
n4
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k2¼1
X
n
k3¼1
X
n
k4¼1
E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik1 	 liiÞ
(
)
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik2 	 liiÞ
(
)
"

1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik3 	 liiÞ
(
)
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik4 	 liiÞ
(
)#
:
ðA:1Þ
In the summation on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.1), the expectation is nonzero
only if k1 ¼ k2 or k1 ¼ k3 or k1 ¼ k4 or k2 ¼ k3 or k2 ¼ k4 or k3 ¼ k4: Since these six
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
392


PAGE 29
conditions are symmetric, we have:
E½ðm 	 mÞ4
p 6
n4
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k3¼1
X
n
k4¼1
E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik1 	 liiÞ
(
)2
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik3 	 liiÞ
(
)
2
4


1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik4 	 liiÞ
(
)3
5

p 6
n4
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k3¼1
X
n
k4¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
1
p
Xp
i¼1 ðy2
ik1 	 liiÞ

4
"
#
v
u
u
t

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik3 	 liiÞ
(
)2
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik4 	 liiÞ
(
)2
2
4
3
5
v
u
u
u
t
p 6
n4
Xn
k1¼1
X
n
k3¼1
X
n
k4¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
1
p
Xp
i¼1 ðy2
ik1 	 liiÞ

4
"
#
v
u
u
t

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik3 	 liiÞ
(
)4
2
4
3
5
4
v
u
u
u
t
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
ik4 	 liiÞ
(
)4
2
4
3
5
4
v
u
u
u
t
p6
n E
1
p
Xp
i¼1 ðy2
i1 	 liiÞ

4
"
#
:
Now we want to eliminate the lii’s from the bound. We can do it by using the
inequality:
E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ðy2
i1 	 liiÞ
(
)4
2
4
3
5
¼
X
4
q¼0
ð	1Þq
4
q


E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
(
)q
"
#
E 1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
"
#4	q
p
X
4
q¼0
4
q


E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
(
)4
2
4
3
5
q=4
E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
(
)4
2
4
3
5
ð4	qÞ=4
p24E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
(
)4
2
4
3
5:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
393


PAGE 30
Therefore, we have
E½ðm 	 mÞ4
p96
n E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
(
)4
2
4
3
5p96
n E 1
p
X
p
i¼1
y8
i1
"
#
p96K2
n
-0:
This shows that the estimator m converges to its expectation m in quartic mean.
&
A.4. Proof of Lemma 3.3
We prove this lemma by successively decomposing d2 	 d2 into terms that are
easier to study.
d2 	 d2 ¼ ðjjS 	 mIjj2 	 jjS 	 mIjj2Þ þ ðjjS 	 mIjj2 	 E½jjS 	 mIjj2
Þ:
ðA:2Þ
It is sufﬁcient to show that both terms in parentheses on the right-hand side of
Eq. (A.2) converge to zero in quadratic mean. Consider the ﬁrst term. Since mI is the
orthogonal projection for the inner product /; S of the sample covariance matrix
S onto the line spanned by the identity, we have: jjS 	 mIjj2 	 jjS 	 mIjj2 ¼
jjmI 	 mIjj2 ¼ ðm 	 mÞ2; therefore, by Lemma 3.2 it converges to zero in quadratic
mean. Now consider the second term:
jjS 	 mIjj2 ¼ m2 	 2mm þ jjSjj2:
ðA:3Þ
Again it is sufﬁcient to show that the three terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.3)
converge to their expectations in quadratic mean. The ﬁrst term m2 is equal to its
expectation, so it trivially does. The second term 2mm does too by Lemma 3.2,
keeping in mind that m is bounded by Lemma 3.1. Now consider the third term jjSjj2:
jjSjj2 ¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
1
n
X
n
k¼1
yikyjk
 
!2
¼ p
n2
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k2¼1
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
¼ p
n2
X
n
k¼1
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
ik
 
!2
þ p
n2
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k2¼1
k2ak1
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
:
ðA:4Þ
Again it is sufﬁcient to show that both terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.4)
converge to their expectations in quadratic mean. Consider the ﬁrst term:
Var
p
n2
X
n
k¼1
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
ik
 
!2
2
4
3
5 ¼ p2
n3 Var
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
 
!2
2
4
3
5
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
394


PAGE 31
p p2
n3 E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y2
i1
 
!4
2
4
3
5
p
1
n
  p
n
# $2
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y8
i1
 
!
p K2
1K2
n
-0:
Therefore, the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.4) converges to its
expectation in quadratic mean. Now consider the second term:
Var
p
n2
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k2¼1
k2ak1
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
2
64
3
75
¼ p2
n4
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k2¼1
k2ak1
X
n
k3¼1
X
n
k4¼1
k4ak3
Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik3yik4
 
!2
2
4
3
5: ðA:5Þ
The
covariances
on
the
right-hand
side
of
Eq. (A.5)
only
depend
on
ðfk1; k2g-fk3; k4gÞ#; the cardinal of the intersection of the set fk1; k2g with the
set fk3; k4g: This number can be zero, one or two. We study each case separately.
ðfk1; k2g-fk3; k4gÞ# ¼ 0 :
In this case ð1
p
Pp
i¼1 yik1yik2Þ2 and ð1
p
Pp
i¼1 yik3yik4Þ2 are independent, so their
covariance is zero.
ðfk1; k2g-fk3; k4gÞ# ¼ 1 :
This case occurs 4nðn 	 1Þðn 	 2Þ times in the summation on the right-hand side of
Eq. (A.5). Each time we have
Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik3yik4
 
!2
2
4
3
5
¼ Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi3
 
!2
2
4
3
5
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
395


PAGE 32
pE
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi2
 
!2
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi3
 
!2
2
4
3
5
pE
1
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
l¼1
yi1yi2yj1yj2yk1yk3yl1yl3
"
#
p 1
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
l¼1
E½yi1yj1yk1yl1
E½yi2yj2
E½yk3yl3
p 1
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
k¼1
E½y2
i1y2
k1
E½y2
i2
E½y2
k3
p 1
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
k¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
k1
q
E½y2
i2
E½y2
k3
p 1
p2
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
E½y2
i1
 
!2
p 1
p2
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
 
!2
p 1
p2
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y8
i1
 
!
pK2
p2
and
	 Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik3yik4
 
!2
2
4
3
5
¼ 	Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi3
 
!2
2
4
3
5
pE
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi2
 
!2
2
4
3
5E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi3
 
!2
2
4
3
5
p
1
p2
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E½yi1yj1
2
 
!2
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
396


PAGE 33
p1
p
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y2
i1
2
 
!2
p 1
p2
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y8
i1
 
!
pK2
p2 :
Therefore, in this case the absolute value of the covariance on the right-hand side of
Eq. (A.5) is bounded by K2=p2:
ðfk1; k2g-fk3; k4gÞ# ¼ 2 :
This case occurs 2nðn 	 1Þ times in the summation on the right-hand side of
Eq. (A.5). Each time we have:
Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik3yik4
 
!2
2
4
3
5


¼ Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yi1yi2
 
!2
2
4
3
5


p 1
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
l¼1
jCov½yi1yi2yj1yj2; yk1yk2yl1yl2
j:
ðA:6Þ
In the summation on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.6), the set of quadruples
of integers between 1 and p can be decomposed into two disjoint subsets:
f1; y; pg4 ¼ Q,R; where Q contains those quadruples that are made of four
distinct integers, and R contains the remainder. Thus, we can make the following
decomposition:
Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik3yik4
 
!2
2
4
3
5


p 1
p4
X
ði; j;k;lÞAQ
jCov½yi1yi2yj1yj2; yk1yk2yl1yl2
j
þ 1
p4
X
ði; j;k;lÞAR
jCov½yi1yi2yj1yj2; yk1yk2yl1yl2
j:
Let us express the ﬁrst term of this decomposition as a function of the quantity
that vanishes under Assumption 3: v ¼ p2
n2 
P
ði; j;k;lÞAQ ðCov½yi1yj1;yk1yl1
Þ2
Cardinal of Q
: First, notice
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
397


PAGE 34
that the cardinal of Q is pðp 	 1Þðp 	 2Þðp 	 3Þ: Also, when iaj and kal; we have
E½yi1yj1
 ¼ E½yk1yl1
 ¼ 0; therefore,
jCov½yi1yi2yj1yj2; yk1yk2yl1yl2
j
¼ jE½yi1yi2yj1yj2yk1yk2yl1yl2
	 E½yi1yi2yj1yj2
E½yk1yk2yl1yl2
j
¼ jE½yi1yj1yk1yl1
2 	 E½yi1yj1
2E½yk1yl1
2j
¼ E½yi1yj1yk1yl1
2
¼ ðCov½yi1yj1; yk1yl1
 þ E½yi1yj1
E½yk1yl1
Þ2
¼ ðCov½yi1yj1; yk1yl1
Þ2:
This enables us to express the ﬁrst term of the decomposition as: n2ðp	1Þðp	2Þðp	3Þ
p5
v:
Now consider the second term of the decomposition. The summation over R only
extends over the quadruples ði; j; k; lÞ such that i ¼ j or i ¼ k or i ¼ l or j ¼ k or j ¼ l
or k ¼ l: Since these six conditions are symmetric, we have:
1
p4
X
ði; j;k;lÞAR
jCov½yi1yi2yj1yj2; yk1yk2yl1yl2
j
p 6
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
k¼1
jCov½yi1yi2yi1yi2; yk1yk2yl1yl2
j
p 6
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
k¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y2
i1y2
i2y2
i1y2
i2
E½y2
k1y2
k2y2
l1y2
l2
q
p 6
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
k¼1
E½y4
i1
E½y2
k1y2
l1
p 6
p4
X
p
i¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
k¼1
E½y4
i1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
k1
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
l1
q
p6
p
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
 
!
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
q
 
!2
p6
p
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
 
!2
p6
p
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y8
i1
 
!
p6K2
p :
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
398


PAGE 35
This completes the study of the decomposition, and also of the three possible cases.
We can now bring all the results together to bound the summation on the right-hand
side of Eq. (A.5):
p2
n4
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k2¼1
k2ak1
X
n
k3¼1
X
n
k4¼1
k4ak3
Cov
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik1yik2
 
!2
;
1
p
X
p
i¼1
yik3yik4
 
!2
2
4
3
5


pp2
n4 4nðn 	 1Þðn 	 2ÞK2
p2 þ 2nðn 	 1Þn2ðp 	 1Þðp 	 2Þðp 	 3Þ
p5
v

þ 2nðn 	 1Þ 6K2
p

p4K2ð1 þ 3K1Þ
n
þ 2v-0:
Backing up, the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.4) converges to its
expectation in quadratic mean. Backing up again, the third term jjSjj2 on the right-
hand side of Eq. (A.3) converges to its expectation in quadratic mean. Backing up
more, the second term between parentheses on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.2)
converges to zero in quadratic mean. Backing up one last time, d2 	 d2 converges to
zero in quadratic mean. For future reference note that, since jjS 	 mIjj2 converges to
its expectation d2 in quadratic mean and since d2 is bounded, E½jjS 	 mIjj4
 is
bounded.
&
A.5. Proof of Lemma 3.4
We ﬁrst prove that the unconstrained estimator %b2 is consistent. As before, we do
it by successively decomposing %b2 	 b2 into terms that are easier to study.
%b2 	 b2 ¼
1
n2
X
n
k¼1
jjxkxt
k 	 Sjj2 	 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
(
)
þ
1
n2
X
n
k¼1
jjxkxt
k 	 Sjj2 	 1
n2
X
n
k¼1
jjxkxt
k 	 Sjj2
(
)
:
ðA:7Þ
It is sufﬁcient to show that both bracketed terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.7)
converge to zero in quadratic mean. Consider the ﬁrst term:
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 ¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E
1
n
X
n
k¼1
xikxjk 	 sij
 
!2
2
4
3
5
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
Var 1
n
X
n
k¼1
xikxjk
"
#
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
399


PAGE 36
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
1
n2
X
n
k¼1
Var½xikxjk
¼ 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
Var½xi1xj1
¼ 1
pn
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
E½ðxi1xj1 	 sijÞ2
¼ E 1
n jjx1xt
1 	 Sjj2


¼ E
1
n2
X
n
k¼1
jjxkxt
k 	 Sjj2
"
#
:
Therefore, the ﬁrst bracketed term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.7) has
expectation zero. For k ¼ 1; y; n let yk denote the pn  1 vector holding the kth
column of the matrix Y:
Var 1
n2
X
n
k¼1
jjxkxt
k 	 Sjj2
"
#
¼ 1
n Var 1
njjx1xt
1 	 Sjj2


¼ 1
n Var 1
n jjy1yt
1 	 Ljj2


¼
1
p2n3
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
l¼1
Cov½yi1yj1 	 lij; yk1yl1 	 lkl
¼
1
p2n3
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
l¼1
Cov½yi1yj1; yk1yl1
p 1
p2n3
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
l¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y2
i1y2
j1
E½y2
k1y2
l1
q
p 1
p2n3
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
X
p
k¼1
X
p
l¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
E½y4
j1
E½y4
k1
E½y4
l1
4q
pp2
n3
1
p
X
p
i¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½y4
i1
4q
 
!4
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
400


PAGE 37
pp2
n3
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
 
!
pp2
n3
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
p
Xp
i¼1 E½y8
i1
s
pK2
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
n
:
Therefore, the ﬁrst bracketed term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.7) converges to
zero in quadratic mean. Now consider the second term:
1
n2
Xn
k¼1 jjxkxt
k 	 Sjj2 	 1
n2
X
n
k¼1
jjxkxt
k 	 Sjj2
¼
1
n2
X
n
k¼1
2ðS 	 SÞ;
xkxt
k 	 S þ S
2


*
+
¼
2
nðS 	 SÞ;
1
n
X
n
k¼1
xkxt
k 	 S þ S
2
 
!
*
+
¼
2
nðS 	 SÞ;
S 	 S þ S
2


)
*
¼ 1
n jjS 	 Sjj2:
E½jjS 	 Sjj4
 is bounded since E½jjS 	 mIjj4
 and jjS 	 mIjj are bounded. Therefore,
the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.7) converges to zero in quadratic
mean. Backing up once more, %b2 	 b2 converges to zero in quadratic mean. Now let
us turn to the constrained estimator b2 ¼ minð %b2; d2Þ:
b2 	 b2 ¼ minð %b2; d2Þ 	 b2p %b2 	 b2pj %b2 	 b2jpmaxðj %b2 	 b2j; jd2 	 d2jÞ
a.s. Furthermore, using d2Xb2; we have
b2 	 b2 ¼ minð %b2; d2Þ 	 b2
¼ minð %b2 	 b2; d2 	 b2Þ
X minð %b2 	 b2; d2 	 d2Þ
X minð	j %b2 	 b2j; 	jd2 	 d2jÞ
X 	 maxðj %b2 	 b2j; jd2 	 d2jÞ
a.s. Therefore,
E½ðb2 	 b2Þ2
pE½maxðj %b2 	 b2j; jd2 	 d2jÞ2
pE½ð %b2 	 b2Þ2
 þ E½ðd2 	 d2Þ2
:
On the right-hand side, the ﬁrst term converges to zero as we have shown earlier in
this section, and the second term converges to zero as we have shown in Lemma 3.3.
Therefore, b2 	 b2 converges to zero in quadratic mean.
&
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
401


PAGE 38
A.6. Proof of Lemma 3.5
Follows trivially from Lemmata 2.1, 3.3, and 3.4.
&
A.7. Proof of Theorem 3.2
The following lemma will be useful in proving Theorems 3.2 and 3.3 and
Lemma 3.6.
Lemma A.1. If u2 is a sequence of nonnegative random variables (implicitly indexed by
n, as usual) whose expectations converge to zero, and t1; t2 are two nonrandom scalars,
and
u2
dt1dt2p2ðd2 þ d2Þ a.s., then
E
u2
dt1dt2


-0:
Proof of Lemma A.1. Fix e40: Recall that the subscript n has been omitted to make
the notation lighter, but is present implicitly. Let N denote the set of indices n such
that d2pe=8: Since, d2 	 d2-0 in quadratic mean, there exists an integer n1 such
that 8nXn1
E½jd2 	 d2j
pe=4: For every nXn1 inside the set N; we have
E
u2
dt1dt2


p2ðE½d2
 þ d2Þp2ðE½jd2 	 d2j
 þ 2d2Þp2 e
4 þ 2 e
8
#
$
¼ e:
ðA:8Þ
Now consider the complementary of the set N: Since E½u2
-0; there exists an
integer n2 such that
8nXn2
E½u2
p et1þt2þ1
24t1þ3t2þ1:
Let 1fg denote the indicator function of an event, and let PrðÞ denote its probability.
From the proof of Lemma 3.1, d2 is bounded by ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
: Since d2 	 d2
converges to zero in quadratic mean, hence in probability, there exists an integer n3
such that
8nXn3
Pr jd2 	 d2jX e
16
#
$
p
4e
16ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
þ e:
For every nXmaxðn2; n3Þ outside the set N; we have:
E
u2
dt1 dt2


¼ E
u2
dt1dt2 1fd2pe=16g


þ E
u2
dt1dt2 1fd24e=16g


p E 2ðd2 þ d2Þ1fd2pe=16g
+
,
þ
16
e

t1
8
e
 t2
E½u21fd24e=16g
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
402


PAGE 39
p 2 ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
þ e
16
n
o
Pr jd2 	 d2jX e
16
#
$
þ
16
e

t1
8
e
 t2
E½u2
p 2 ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
þ e
16
n
o
4e
16ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
þ e
þ
16
e

t1
8
e
 t2 et1þt2þ1
24t1þ3t2þ1
p e:
ðA:9Þ
Bringing together the results inside and outside the set N obtained in Eqs. (A.8) and
(A.9) yields
8nXmaxðn1; n2; n3Þ
E
u2
dt1dt2


pe:
This ends the proof of the lemma.
&
Consider the ﬁrst statement of Theorem 3.2:
jjS 	 Sjj2 ¼
b2
d2 ðm 	 mÞI þ
a2
d2 	 a2
d2


ðS 	 mIÞ




2
¼ b4
d4ðm 	 mÞ2 þ
a2
d2 	 a2
d2

2
jjS 	 mIjj2
þ 2 b2
d2ðm 	 mÞ a2
d2 	 a2
d2


/S 	 mI; IS
¼ b4
d4ðm 	 mÞ2 þ
a2
d2 	 a2
d2

2
d2
p ðm 	 mÞ2 þ ða2d2 	 a2d2Þ2
d2d4
:
ðA:10Þ
It is sufﬁcient to show that the expectations of both terms on the right-hand side of
Eq. (A.10) converge to zero. The expectation of the ﬁrst term does by Lemma 3.2.
Now consider the second term. Since a2pd2 and a2pd2; note that
ða2d2 	 a2d2Þ2
d2d4
pd2p2ðd2 þ d2Þ
a:s:
Furthermore, since a2 	 a2 and d2 	 d2 converge to zero in quadratic mean, and
since a2 and d2 are bounded, a2d2 	 a2d2 ¼ ða2 	 a2Þd2 	 a2ðd2 	 d2Þ converges to
zero in quadratic mean. Therefore, the assumptions of Lemma A.1 are veriﬁed by
u2 ¼ ða2d2 	 a2d2Þ2; t1 ¼ 2 and t2 ¼ 4: It implies that
E ða2d2 	 a2d2Þ2
d2d4
"
#
-0:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
403


PAGE 40
The expectation of second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.10) converges to
zero. Backing up, jjS 	 Sjj converges to zero in quadratic mean. This completes
the proof of the ﬁrst statement of Theorem 3.2. Now consider the second statement:
E½jjjS 	 Sjj2 	 jjS 	 Sjj2j
 ¼ E½j/S 	 S; S þ S 	 2SSj
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½jjS þ S 	 2Sjj2
q
: ðA:11Þ
As we have shown above, the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.11)
converges to zero. Given that E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 is bounded, it also implies that the
second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.11) is bounded. Therefore, the product
of the two terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.11) converges to zero. This
completes the proof of the second and ﬁnal statement.
&
A.8. Proof of Lemma 3.6
We have:
a2b2
d2 	 a2b2
d2

 ¼ ja2b2d2 	 a2b2d2j
d2d2
:
Let us verify that the assumptions of Lemma A.1 hold for u2 ¼ ja2b2d2 	 a2b2d2j;
t1 ¼ 2 and t2 ¼ 2: Notice that:
a2b2
d2 	 a2b2
d2

pa2b2
d2 þ a2b2
d2 pa2 þ a2pd2 þ d2p2ðd2 þ d2Þ
a.s. Furthermore,
E½ja2b2d2 	 a2b2d2j
¼ E½jða2b2 	 a2b2Þd2 	 a2b2ðd2 	 d2Þj
¼ E½jða2 	 a2Þðb2 	 b2Þd2 þ a2ðb2 	 b2Þd2 þ ða2 	 a2Þb2d2 	 a2b2ðd2 	 d2Þj
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½ða2 	 a2Þ2
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½ðb2 	 b2Þ2
q
d2 þ a2E½jb2 	 b2j
d2 þ E½ja2 	 a2j
b2d2
	 a2b2E½jd2 	 d2j
:
The right-hand side converges to zero by Lemmata 3.1, 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5. Therefore,
E½u2
-0; and the assumptions of Lemma A.1 are veriﬁed. It implies that
E
a2b2
d2 	 a2b2
d2




-0:
&
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
404


PAGE 41
A.9. Proof of Theorem 3.3
Deﬁne a2 ¼ /S; SS 	 mm: Its expectation is E½a2
 ¼ jjSjj2 	 m2 ¼ a2: We have:
ja2j ¼ j/S; SS 	 mmj ¼ j/S 	 mI; S 	 mISj
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jjS 	 mIjj2
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jjS 	 mIjj2
q
pdd:
ðA:12Þ
Let us prove that a2 	 a2 converges to zero in quadratic mean:
Var½a2
 ¼ Var½/S; SS 	 mm
¼ Var½/S; SS
 þ Var½mm
 	 2 Cov½/S; SS; mm
p 2 Var½/S; SS
 þ 2 Var½mm
p 2m2 Var½m
 þ 2 Var½/S; SS
:
ðA:13Þ
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.13) converges to zero, since m is
bounded by Lemma 3.1, and since Var½m
 converges to zero by Lemma 3.2. Consider
the second term:
/S; SS ¼ 1
p trðSStÞ
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
sijsij
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
sij
1
n
X
n
k¼1
xikxjk
 
!
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
X
p
j¼1
lij
1
n
X
n
k¼1
yikyjk
 
!
¼ 1
p
X
p
i¼1
lii
1
n
X
n
k¼1
y2
ik
 
!
:
Therefore,
Var½/S; SS
 ¼ Var 1
p
X
p
i¼1
lii
1
n
X
n
k¼1
y2
ik
 
!
"
#
¼ Var 1
n
X
n
k¼1
1
p
X
p
i¼1
liiy2
ik
 
!
"
#
¼ 1
n2
X
n
k1¼1
X
n
k2¼1
Cov 1
p
X
p
i¼1
liiy2
ik1; 1
p
X
p
i¼1
liiy2
ik2
"
#
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
405


PAGE 42
¼ 1
n2
X
n
k¼1
Var 1
p
X
p
i¼1
liiy2
ik
"
#
¼ 1
n Var 1
p
X
p
i¼1
liiy2
i1
"
#
p 1
n E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
liiy2
i1
 
!2
2
4
3
5
p 1
n E
1
p
X
p
i¼1
l2
ii
 
!
1
p
X
p
i¼1
y4
i1
 
!
"
#
p 1
n
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y2
i1
2
 
!
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
 
!
p 1
n
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y4
i1
 
!2
p 1
n
1
p
X
p
i¼1
E½y8
i1
 
!
p K2
n :
It implies that the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.13) converges to
zero. Backing up, a2 	 a2 converges to zero in quadratic mean. Now let us ﬁnd an
explicit formula for the solution S to the optimization problem in Eq. (15). This
problem is very similar to the one in Theorem 2.1 but, instead of solving it with
calculus as we did then, we will give an equivalent treatment based on geometry. The
solution is the orthogonal projection according to the inner product /; S of the
true covariance matrix S onto the plane spanned by the identity matrix I and
the sample covariance matrix S: Note that /S 	 mI; IS ¼ 0; therefore, ðI; S	mI
jjS	mIjjÞ
forms an orthonormal basis for this plane. The formula for the projection has a
simple expression in terms of the orthonormal basis:
S ¼ /S; ISI þ
S; S 	 mI
jjS 	 mIjj
)
* S 	 mI
jjS 	 mIjj
¼ mI þ /S; SS 	 mm
jjS 	 mIjj2 ðS 	 mIÞ
¼ mI þ a2
d2ðS 	 mIÞ:
From now on, the proof is the same as for Theorem 32:
jjS 	 Sjj2 ¼
mI þ a2
d2ðS 	 mIÞ 	 mI 	 a2
d2ðS 	 mIÞ




2
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
406


PAGE 43
¼
ðm 	 mÞI þ a2 	 a2
d2
ðS 	 mIÞ




2
¼ ðm 	 mÞ2 þ ða2 	 a2Þ2
d4
jjS 	 mIjj2 þ 2ðm 	 mÞa2 	 a2
d2
/S 	 mI; IS
¼ ðm 	 mÞ2 þ ða2 	 a2Þ2
d2
:
ðA:14Þ
It is sufﬁcient to show that the expectations of both terms on the right-hand side of
Eq. (A.14) converge to zero. The expectation of the ﬁrst term does by Lemma 3.2.
Now consider the second term:
ða2 	 a2Þ2
d2
¼ a4 þ a2
2 	 2a2a2
d2
p 2a4 þ 2a2
2
d2
p 2d2 þ 2d2;
where we have used Eq. (A.12). Furthermore, since a2 	 a2 and a2 	 a2 both
converge to zero in quadratic mean, a2 	 a2 also does. Therefore, the assumptions of
Lemma A.1 are veriﬁed by u2 ¼ ða2 	 a2Þ2; t1 ¼ 2 and t2 ¼ 0: It implies that
E ða2 	 a2Þ2
d2
"
#
-0:
The expectation of the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.14) converges to
zero. Backing up, jjS 	 Sjj converges to zero in quadratic mean. This completes
the proof of the ﬁrst statement of Theorem 3.3. Now consider the second statement:
E½jjjS 	 Sjj2 	 jjS 	 Sjj2j
 ¼ E½j/S 	 S; S þ S 	 2SSj
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½jjS 	 Sjj2
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½jjS þ S 	 2Sjj2
q
:
ðA:15Þ
As we have shown above, the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.15)
converges to zero. Given that E½jjS 	 Sjj2
 is bounded, it also implies that the
second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.15) is bounded. Therefore, the product
of the two terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.15) converges to zero. This
completes the proof of the second and ﬁnal statement.
&
A.10. Proof of Theorem 3.4
lim infðE½jj #S 	 Sjj2
 	 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
ÞX infðE½jj #S 	 Sjj2
 	 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
Þ
þ limðE½jjS 	 Sjj2
 	 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
Þ:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
407


PAGE 44
By construction of S; we have jj #S 	 Sjj2 	 jjS 	 Sjj2X0 a.s.; therefore, the ﬁrst
term on the right-hand side is nonnegative. The second term on the right-hand side is
zero by Theorem 3.3. Therefore, the left-hand side is nonnegative. This proves the
ﬁrst statement of Theorem 3.4. Now consider the second statement:
limðE½jj #S 	 Sjj2
 	 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
Þ ¼ 03 limðE½jj #S 	 Sjj2
 	 E½jjS 	 Sjj2
Þ ¼ 0
3 lim E½jj #S 	 Sjj2 	 jjS 	 Sjj2
 ¼ 0
3 lim E½jj #S 	 Sjj2
 ¼ 0
3 lim E½jj #S 	 Sjj2
 ¼ 0:
This completes the proof of the second and ﬁnal statement.
&
A.11. Proof of Theorem 3.5
Let lmaxðAÞ ðlminðAÞÞ denote the largest (smallest) eigenvalue of the matrix A: The
theorem is invariant to the multiplication of all the eigenvalues of S by a positive
number. Therefore, we can normalize S so that m ¼ 1 without loss of generality.
Then the assumption that the condition number of S is bounded is equivalent to the
existence
of
two
constants
%l
and
%l
independent
of
n
such
that:
0o%lplminðSÞplmaxðSÞp%loN: First, let us prove that the largest eigenvalue of
S is bounded in probability. Let Z ¼ L	1=2Y denote the normalized variables that
are assumed to be cross-sectionally iid. We have
lmaxðSÞ ¼ lmax
b2
d2 mI þ a2
d2 S


¼ b2
d2 m þ a2
d2 lmaxðSÞ
p b2
d2 lmaxðSÞ þ a2
d2 lmaxðSÞ
p lmaxðSÞ
p lmax
1
n L1=2ZZtL1=2


p lmax
1
n ZZt


lmaxðLÞ
p lmax
1
n ZZt


%l
a.s. Assume with loss of generality, but temporarily, that p=n converges to some
limit. Call the limit c: Assumption 1 implies that cpK1: In this case, Yin et al. [26]
show that
lmax
1
n ZZt


-ð1 þ
ﬃﬃc
p Þ2
a:s:
ðA:16Þ
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
408


PAGE 45
It implies that:
Pr lmax
1
n ZZt


p2 1 þ
ﬃﬃc
p
/
02


-1;
Pr lmaxðSÞp2 1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K1
p
#
$2%l


-1:
ðA:17Þ
Therefore, in the particular case where p=n converges to a limit, the largest
eigenvalue of S is bounded in probability. Now consider the general case where p=n
need not have a limit. Remember that p=n is bounded by Assumption 1. Take any
subsequence along which p=n converges. Along this subsequence, the largest
eigenvalue of S is bounded in probability. Notice that the bound in Eq. (A.17) is
independent of the particular subsequence. Since Eq. (A.17) holds along any
converging subsequence, it holds along the sequence as a whole. This proves that the
largest eigenvalue of S is bounded in probability. Now let us prove that the smallest
eigenvalue of S is bounded away from zero in probability. A reasoning similar to
the one above leads to: lminðSÞXlminðZZt=nÞ%l a.s. Again assume with loss of
generality, but temporarily, that p=n converges to some limit c: First consider the
case cp1=2: Bai and Yin [2] show that
lmin
1
n ZZt


- 1 	
ﬃﬃc
p
/
02
a:s:
ðA:18Þ
It implies that:
Pr lmin
1
n ZZt


X1
2 1 	
ﬃﬃc
p
/
02


-1;
Pr
lminðSÞX1
2 1 	
ﬃﬃ
1
2
r
 
!2
%l
8
<
:
9
=
;-1:
ðA:19Þ
Now turn to the other case: c41=2: In this case, we use
lminðSÞ ¼ b2
d2 m þ a2
d2 lminðSÞXb2
d2 m:
Fix any e40: For large enough n; p=nX1=2 	 e: Also, by Theorem 3.1, for large
enough n; b2Xðp=nÞðm2 þ y2Þ 	 eX1=2 	 2e: In particular, b2X1=4 for large enough
n: As a consequence, d2X1=4 for large enough n: We can make the following
decomposition:
b2
d2 m 	 b2
d2 m ¼ b2
d2ðm 	 mÞ þ b2 	 b2
d2
m þ b2m
1
d2 	 1
d2


:
ðA:20Þ
We are going to show that all three terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (A.20)
converge to zero in probability. The ﬁrst term does as a consequence of Lemma 3.2
since b2=d2p1: Now consider the second term. For large enough n:
E jb2 	 b2j
d2
m


p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½ðb2 	 b2Þ2
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E½m2
p
1=4
:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
409


PAGE 46
In the numerator on the right-hand side, E½ðb2 	 b2Þ2
 converges to zero by Lemma
3.4, and E½m2
 is bounded by Lemmata 3.1 and 3.2. Therefore, the second term on
the right-hand side of Eq. (A.20) converges to zero in ﬁrst absolute moment, hence in
probability. Now consider the third and last term. Since d2 	 d2 converges to zero in
probability by Lemma 3.3, and since d2 is bounded away from zero, d	2 	 d	2
converges to zero in probability. Furthermore, m and b2 are bounded in probability
by Lemmata 3.1, 3.2, and 3.4. Therefore, the third term on the right-hand side of
Eq. (A.20) converges to zero in probability. It implies that the left-hand side of
Eq. (A.20) converges to zero in probability. Remember that, in the proof of Lemma
3.1, we have shown that d2pð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
: For any e40; we have:
Pr b2
d2 mXb2
d2 m 	 e


-1;
Pr lminðSÞXb2
d2 m 	 e


-1;
Pr lminðSÞX
b2
ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
	 e


-1;
Pr lminðSÞX
1
2 	 2e
ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
	 e


-1:
There exists a particular value of e40 that yields
Pr lminðSÞX
1
4ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p


-1:
Bringing together the results obtained in the cases cp1=2 and c41=2; we have
Pr
lminðSÞXmin
1
2 1 	
ﬃﬃ
1
2
r
 
!2
%l;
1
4ð1 þ K1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2
p
0
@
1
A
8
<
:
9
=
;-1:
ðA:21Þ
Therefore, in the particular case where p=n converges to a limit, the smallest
eigenvalue of S is bounded away from zero in probability. Again notice that the
bound in Eq. (A.21) does not depend on p=n: Therefore, by the same reasoning as for
the largest eigenvalue, it implies that the smallest eigenvalue of S is bounded away
from zero in probability, even in the general case where p=n need not have a limit.
Bringing together the results obtained for the largest and the smallest eigenvalue, the
condition number of S is bounded in probability.
&
References
[1] S.A. Aivazyan, I.S. Yenukov, L.D. Meshalkin, Applied Statistics, Reference Edition M., Finances
and Statistics, 1985 (Russian).
[2] Z.D. Bai, Y.Q. Yin, Limit of the smallest eigenvalue of a large dimensional sample covariance matrix,
Ann. Probab. 21 (3) (1993) 1275–1294.
[3] S.J. Brown, The number of factors in security returns, J. Finance 44 (1989) 1247–1262.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
410


PAGE 47
[4] D.K. Dey, C. Srinivasan, Estimation of a covariance matrix under Stein’s loss, Ann. Statist. 13 (4)
(1985) 1581–1591.
[5] V.L. Girko, G-analysis of observations of enormous dimensionality, Calculative Appl. Math. 60
(1986a) 115–121 (Russian).
[6] V.L. Girko, G2-estimations of spectral functions of covariance matrices, Theor. Probab. Math.
Statist. 35 (1986b) 28–31 (Russian).
[7] V.L. Girko, Theory of Random Determinants, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1990.
[8] L.R. Haff, Empirical Bayes estimation of the multivariate normal covariance matrix, Ann. Statist. 8
(1980) 586–597.
[9] L.R. Haff, Solutions of the Euler–Lagrange equations for certain multivariate normal estimation
problems, Unpublished manuscript, 1982.
[10] L.P. Hansen, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators, Econometrica
50 (4) (1982) 1029–1054.
[11] W. James, C. Stein, Estimation with quadratic loss, in: J. Neyman (Ed.), Proceedings of the Fourth
Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Vol. 1, Univ. of California Press,
Berkeley, pp. 361–379.
[12] S. Kandel, R.F. Stambaugh, Porfolio inefﬁciency and the cross-section of expected returns, J. Finance
50 (1) (1995) 157–184.
[13] J. La¨ uter, Exact t and F tests for analyzing studies with multiple endpoints, Biometrics 52 (1996)
964–970.
[14] J. La¨ uter, E. Glimm, S. Kropf, Multivariate tests based on left-spherically distributed linear scores,
Ann. Statist. 26 (5) (1998) 1972–1988.
[15] S.P. Lin, M.D. Perlman, A Monte-Carlo comparison of four estimators of a covariance matrix,
in: P.R. Krishnaiah (Ed.), Multivariate Analysis, Vol. VI, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1985,
pp. 411–429.
[16] H. Markowitz, Portfolio selection, J. Finance 7 (1) (1952) 77–91.
[17] V.A. Marcˇ enko, L.A. Pastur, Distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of random matrices, Math.
USSR—Sbo. 1 (4) (1967) 457–483.
[18] R.J. Muirhead, Developments in eigenvalue estimation, Adv. Multivariate Statist. Anal. (1987)
277–288.
[19] R.J. Muirhead, P.L. Leung, Estimation of parameter matrices and eigenvalues in MANOVA and
canonical correlation analysis, Ann. Statist. 15 (4) (1987) 1651–1666.
[20] J.W. Silverstein, Strong convergence of the empirical distribution of eigenvalues of large dimensional
random matrices, J. Multivariate Anal. 55 (2) (1995) 331–339.
[21] C. Stein, Estimation of a covariance matrix, Rietz Lecture, 39th Annual Meeting IMS, Atlanta, GA,
1975.
[22] C. Stein, Series of lectures given at the University of Washington, Seattle, 1982.
[23] H. Theil, K. Laitinen, Singular moment matrix in applied econometrics, in: P.R. Krishnaiah (Ed.),
Multivariate Analysis, Vol. V, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980, pp. 629–649.
[24] H.D. Vinod, Maximum entropy measurement error estimates of singular covariance matrices in
undersized samples, J. Econometrics 20 (1982) 163–174.
[25] Y.Q. Yin, Limiting spectral distribution for a class of random matrices, J. Multivariate Anal. 20
(1986) 50–68.
[26] Y.Q. Yin, Z.D. Bai, P.R. Krishnaiah, On the limit of the largest eigenvalue of the large dimensional
sample covariance matrix, Probab. Theory Related Fields 78 (4) (1988) 509–521.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O. Ledoit, M. Wolf / Journal of Multivariate Analysis 88 (2004) 365–411
411
